# SGM
Segmented Genome Model (SGM) Builder
The application facilitated the generation of models from segmented and clustered genomes. This process involves a two step in the analysis: in the first step, it accepts the genomes in .fna format, performing the segmentation and clustering of each genome, producing multiple cluster files (in .fa format). In the second step, it processes a the metagenome read file (in FASTA format), converting it to markov-chain indices for efficient probability calculation against the clusters of each genome file instead of complete genome files in SMM. Markov chains are constructed directly from genomic FASTA files, and are retained in memory until all reads are classified.

## 1. Segmentation and Clustering of the genome

This step involves the segmentation and clustering of each genome based on the specied Markov model order and the threshold for genome segmentation, contiguous clustering and noncontiguous clustering. The Markov model order is used here for the calculation of divergence measure used in genome clustering.
To execute this step:
1. Place the genome file for modeling in the "db_folder", which currently contains an example FASTA genome file.
2. Run the shell script in the Linux terminal:

 `sh Step_1.sh`

Once the clustered file is generated for a particular genome, there is no need to regenerate the clusters for that same genome. To add a new genome to the database, create a new database folder, add the genome (.fna file) to that folder, and rerun the  `step_1.sh`  command, changing the name of the input folder. Alternatively, you can delete the previous genome files in the "db_genome" folder and add the new genomes to that folder before running the command again.

The output of this steps:
1. New folder "clustered_genomes" - containing clustered FASTA (.fa) files for each genome.
2. A "Genomes.txt",listing the absolute path of all the clusterd genomes to be modeled in the next step of taxonomic classifcation.

Note: The increase in the number of genome (.fna) files in the "db_folder" will result in a corresponding increase in the number of cluster files. Since the number of clusters varies for each genome, there is a potential for a high number of cluster files. While this does not significantly impact memory, it may lead to longer completion times for the analysis due to the higher number of models involved.

## 2. Taxonomic classification of the genome

This step is very similar to SMM, which involves the generation of higher(10-12) or lower (6-10) order markov models for metagenomic classification. Normalized probability scores can be exported for 12th order analyses. Trying to use an order other than 12 with the norm parameter will result in a warning (if using the supplied Python script), and reversion to raw scores.
Run the shell script in the Linux terminal: 

`Step_2.sh Genomes.txt Metagenomic_Reads.fasta 12`

The input files include:
1. FASTA file containing Metagenome reads in the sample
2. Txt file containing genome list in the "clustered_genomes".
3. 6 to 12 - Markov model Order to be generated for probabilistic scoring.

The output files include:
1. Metagenomic_Read_Scores.tsv - Normalized Probabilistic scoring the each read generated by each cluster model 
